2021 Toyota Fortuner: 10 key changes
NEW DELHI: Toyota Kirloskar Motor on Wednesday launched the 2021 Fortuner facelift. The SUV has managed to dominate the segment since its launch in 2009 and the 2021 facelift just takes the Fortuner brand to a whole different level. While 2021 facelift doesn’t come with an extensive exterior redesigning, it does feature a lot of game-changing features inside and what’s new under the hood also guarantees a wave of excitement among the Fortuner fanbase. TOI Auto brings you the entire list of things that differ in the 2021 Toyota Fortuner compared to the previous model: 1. Tougher looking front fascia The 2021 Toyota Fortuner’s most prominent visual change comes with the front fascia. The bold SUV now boasts a redesigned front-grille, sculpted side-pontoon shaped bumper, redesigned headlamps with a sharp LED line guide, new DRLs and multi-axis spoke alloy wheels with super chrome metallic finishing. The new visual additions do enhance the sporty look of the car but also give it an elite character. 2. Brawnier turbo-diesel engineThe 2021 Toyota Fortuner carries forward the same two engines from the previous model- 2.7-litre turbo-petrol and 2.8-litre turbo-diesel engine. However, this time the 2.8-litre turbo-diesel engine has been beefed up to offer more power and torque compared to the previous model. The enhanced diesel engine manages to offer 206 PS of power and 500 Nm of torque against the previous 179 PS and 455 Nm of torque, making it the best turbo-diesel engine in the segment. 3. Connected features to keep up with the competitionThe 2021 Toyota Fortuner now joins the list of a very few connected cars in India. Facing tough competition from MG Gloster, the Japanese automaker had to update its inventory too. The SUV now offers connected features like geo-fencing, real-time tracking, last parked location and a few more. 4. Enhanced creature comfortsCreature comforts have become an important aspect in the industry and in a segment like this, Fortuner can’t afford to stay behind its competition. The 2021 Toyota Fortuner now offers ventilated front seats that come with a superior suction-based system, an enhanced 8-inch Smart Playcast touchscreen infotainment system, 11-speaker JBL sound system with a subwoofer which is limited to the diesel 4x4 variant. 5. Plushier interiorsThe Fortuner facelift comes with new interior colour options. The customers will have the option to choose black interiors instead of the standard dark brown. The chamois leather upholstery, which remains the same, will also be offered in the new colour scheme. The SUV also offers an instrument cluster with silver ormentation to add that plush look in the cockpit as well. 6. Smoother drivability The 2021 Toyota Fortuner comes with multiple new additions to enhance its drivability and also its off-roading prowess. The SUV now comes with an auto limited-slip differential as standard while the diesel 4x4 variant holds an advantage as it now comes with an electronic lockable differential. Complementing the engines are the enhanced drive modes- Eco and Sport- that are aimed at making the drives more engaging. The SUV also boasts a variable flow control power steering that really goes well with the Sport mode that offers upgraded steering dynamics. 7. Better off-road performance The Toyota Fortuner now comes with a retuned suspension system to offer better riding comfort. The SUV is a body-on-frame vehicle and that usually results in a bumpy ride whenever it takes on some serious road undulations. But the new suspension system gets softer springs and bushes that not only enhance the SUV’s performance on-road but off-road too. Another new addition that will let you go on carefree mild off-roading adventures is the front clearance sonar. This new addition will enhance the Fortuner’s off-roading prowess while also making it easier to drive in cluttered urban spaces. 8. New colour schemeThe 2021 Toyota Fortuner facelift carries forward its previous colour palette consisting of 7 colour schemes, however, it now offers an all-new sparkling black crystal shine colour to add to its distinct character whenever it's out on the streets. 9. Updated priceThe 2021 Toyota Fortuner facelift comes with a price hike ranging between Rs 1.32 lakh – Rs 3 lakh. While the entry-level 2.7 petrol 4x2 MT variant has attracted the lowest hike of Rs 1.32 lakh, the top-end 2.8 diesel 4x4 AT variant boasts the highest price hike of Rs 3 lakh. Toyota has also drove in the Legender SUV, a special variant of Fortuner, at Rs 37.58 lakh (ex-showroom) - only available in diesel automatic option (2X2). 10. Comparison with rivalsCurrently, the 2021 Toyota Fortuner rivals the MG Gloster, Ford Endeavour, and Mahindra Alturas G4 in the market. While the Fortuner has a better market share compared to Endeavour and Alturas G4, the MG Gloster is catching up quickly with the Japanese icon as the new entrant in the segment comes with features that are way ahead of time. The MG Gloster became the first car in India to offer Level I Autonomous features, comes with the best-connected features in the segment and takes the comfort level a notch up with features like multi-zone climate control and electric sunroof. Toyota Fortuner manages to inch ahead of this rival with a more powerful diesel engine, comprehensive safety package and it also holds an advantage by offering petrol variants too. When it comes to the fully-loaded top-end trims of both the rivals, the MG Gloster costs Rs 35.59 lakh (ex-showroom) and the Toyota Fortuner costs Rs 1.86 lakh dearer at Rs 37.45 lakh (ex-showroom). The 2021 Toyota Fortuner is a much better package than the previous version. With the Toyota Fortuner TRD Edition discontinued, the 2021 Fortuner does fill the gap quite well and justifies its pricing too. The 2021 Toyota Fortuner does miss out on a few styling cues and features like a dual-tone roof, a 360-degree view and auto-folding ORVMs. 