Amid temple row, N Chandrababu Naidu turns right, plays Hindutva card in AP
HYDERABAD: Fighting to remain relevant in the shifting sands of Andhra Pradesh’s politics, the main opposition, Telugu Desam Party (TDP), has for the first time taken a visible Hindutava stand. Although it has aligned with the BJP in the past, its leaders have never openly attacked minorities. It seems to have decided to cross that red line now, even as the focus remains on the YSRC government. TDP chief and former Andhra Pradesh chief minister, N Chandrababu Naidu, while addressing the party’s executive committee on Tuesday at Mangalagiri, alleged that chief minister Y S Jagan Mohan Reddy was encouraging conversions to Christianity in the state. The allegation has come at a time when there have been several incidents in AP where idols of deities have been damaged. While the opposition is attacking the YSRCP government on the issue, the government has openly accused opposition leaders of being behind the desecrations. Jagan called the desecrations ‘new-age crime’ and said only opposition would gain from such tactics. “Jagan is encouraging conversions into Christianity,” Naidu said on Tuesday. “In violating the Constitution, Christian pastors were given Rs 5,000 honorarium per month. Churches have become epicentres of votebank politics.” TDP: Will stand with majority on templesHe added, “Christmas celebrations are done in a police station. A deputy chief minister wished happy Christmas in Lord Venkateswara temple. Are Christians the only people having religious sentiments? Don’t Hindus and Muslims have similar sentiments?" He demanded a judicial probe and CBI enquiry into idols being damaged at Ramateertham temple at Vizianagaram recently. YSRC MLA Ambati Rambabu said, “Chandrababu Naidu is using religion to increase the vote bank. He is behaving like a savior of the Hindu religion, but in reality, he had no respect towards any religion other than his caste. During his rule he had demolished 40 temples overnight.” TDP AP president K Atchannaidu told TOI, “Around 140 incidents of temple attacks took place recently. Jagan should be more careful and ensure the safety of temples. When Naidu was chief minister, there were no attacks on churches and mosques. We will stand by the majority of people when temples are attacked.” Political analyst and ex-MLC professor M Nageshwar said TDP is making a desperate attempt to hijack the Hindutava agenda of BJP in Andhra Pradesh. “It is a difficult task for TDP to get the support of voters on a Hindutva plank no matter how hard they try as it is a patent of BJP,” he said. BJP alleged that Naidu is a political opportunist. The saffron party’s AP president Somu Verraju told TOI, “Naidu has no fixed ideology. He will speak and act as per his needs. It is Naidu who mentioned building churches for Christians in his manifesto. When Narendra Modi was Gujarat chief minister, Naidu said he would have him arrested if he came to Hyderabad. Naidu loves power. He has distributed freebies during Christmas.” 